Let's
just start off first of all, you know, we're
talking a little bit about the picture on the wall.
Tell me a little bit about those three
individuals, which would be your
great-granddad, granddad, and dad then, right?
Right. And kind of where they came from, why they
settled in Garwood. Okay, well, my...
Grandfather was experiencing, as I recall from
the stories, respiratory problems, possibly
pneumonia, and he was told that the best thing for
him to do was to move south, that the cold weather
would not be good for him over the years. So he and
his father somehow got down here and founded
and built in 1928 the Richmond Irrigation
Company. for him to have a livelihood. So that was
W.S.? W.S. and W.K. and W.N. Okay and so it was W.S.
that came down with his dad or was it W.K. with his
dad W.S.? W.K. with his dad W.S.
And so they started the irrigation company in
1928. Yes. Okay. How did they go about, did they
have water rights in, or did they acquire them, or
did they buy the company, or how did they really get
it started? Oh, boy. I know that the water rights
were the eldest on the river of 1900, weren't they?
Yes, and I think they were actually acquired
through the state. okay then they weren't
actually I think at that time they they assigned
them to you but you didn't buy them there was no
value to them at that time yeah right because
because they had owned the Garwood Irrigation
Company and the Richmond Irrigation Company both
and later sold the Richmond Irrigation Company
and just kept the one in Garwood because it was more
profitable at the time. Now whenever they
established that, the Garwood Irrigation
Company, what all did they have to do? Did they have
to put in canals and things like this? Yes.
Well here, work on the canals was declared to have
commenced on November 1st 1900 with about two
miles having been completed and further
construction contemplated most of the canals
were built with mules and scrapers Mr. L.R.
Brayton Mr. W.H. Shaw maternal grandfather of
William and Lair built these canals
okay yeah that was pretty typical I think in those
times too develop those canals with mules as well
as roads and everything else pretty much at the
time and then the first plant was constructed in
the fall of 1900 and spring of 1901 pumping plant
and so what area did it cover or or where did it grow
to cover Oh, wow. Well, the canal system covers
area in Colorado County and parts of Wharton
County. Okay. And I think it was... How many miles
is it? About 200 miles of canal. Yeah. It winds just
like a river. But it's at least about 200 miles of
canal. Now, was this water over the years used
primarily for rice or cotton or a combination
or...? rice primarily rice uh they did water a
little bit of row crop out of it but mainly rice it
was for rice irrigation purposes okay now uh your
family was also involved in the rice industry is
that right yes very much so did so whenever they
first got started along about the time with the
canal today they start farming rice then Or had
they been farming rice before? No, I think they
started because they had the canal system and they
wanted other farmers to get on the canal system as
well. So they went into it also, that as you
understand it. They formed a company corporation
called L7 Ranch that actually did the farming. So
that was one of the companies that Bill actually
had that farms rice, still farms rice today. so uh
about how many acres did he start off with in over
the years I mean where has it grown to?
I don't know what he started off with yeah from the
beginning I don't know I know that we farmed on L-7
ranch uh back in the I would say in 78 to 80 we were
farming 2,500 acres of rice just L-7 alone now uh
they probably farm close to about 800 acres just
because of the farm programs it reduced it not that
the land's not farmed anymore a lot of it is tenant
farmed but farming it yourself in order to to
survive you have to farm the program now yes it's
cut to a little over maybe 800 acres yeah but the
land owned by uh by William and Lair and his sister
and his sister uh it's quite a few acres yeah about
15,000 acres
and so in addition to rice what are some of the other
crops that you've been farming well they tried
soybeans at one point in time and decided that
wasn't the way to go and then other than that we just
use the land for grazing cattle It's sandy soil.
You cannot grow corn, milo. They've tried that.
That hasn't worked out. Yeah, it dries out pretty
quick, doesn't it? Yeah, so basically it's rice
land.
Tell me what you remember from whatever stories
that were told in the family or whatever about,
let's start off with W.S. Lear and a little bit
about him. Gosh, all I remember is that we called
him Pop, and I really don't remember that much
about him. I was very young when he passed away, and
I don't remember many stories being told about
him. Yeah well you're actually pretty lucky to get
to know your great-granddad anyway. At whatever
age, right. Do you know any stories? No. I don't
either. Not about him. Okay, well then what about
your granddad? That's W.K., right? Right. Well, I
can remember some funny stories about him. he was
very generous he was very much a worth ethic kind of
person and he had a lot of foresight in my opinion
and so far as when he put this all together with the
credit union and and then the profit sharing for
such a small community and um but he was a speed
demon and he always had to have a corvette even when
he was elderly he really liked speed what do you
remember yeah well i didn't know him that long uh he
passed away right before i came to work here well
right after i came a few months later but i know one
thing about them they were always for technology
because when i first came here uh to work in 1978 uh
They had actually a computer system here, and you
didn't have very many computers in 1978. Not very
many people had one, and they had a Singer System 10
computer. I'll never forget that. When I came
here, I couldn't believe it. It took up a whole
room. But he was one of the fellows that was always,
and Bill was too, any new technology that was out
there to help advance anything, he was for that.
And he, you know, spent the money to try to get the
technology there. Now, did he influence Bill to go
to A&M, or how did Bill wind up with going to A&M in ag
engineering? Was it because of the technology
influence from his dad, or? Probably. Of course,
Daddy went to Culver, and that was influenced by
his parents, and then I think he was basically told
that he needed to come home and go to A&M. and of
course he was in the corps and I don't know that he
was told that he had to go into ag engineering I know
one day we were driving somewhere and I said what
what had you really intended to do when you went to
college and he said engineering but he did not put
ag before that well at that time if you came from a
farm background that's usually where you went
into was was ag engineering but he even said that he
didn't really have any idea that he'd actually
stay here and be in Garwood until I guess after the
war really is when he came back didn't go back to
school and went to work here yeah his father did he
ever make any comments about anybody at A&M that
really had an influence on his life any of his
teachers or programs
No, the only thing I know of that and his grandson is
at A&M now and he thought the most important thing
was the Corps. It gave you discipline and he wanted
his grandson to be in the Corps but that didn't
happen. He's not in the Corps?
No. My son, he came to A&M to get in the Corps. And he
got there, and he come back home one day and he said,
Dad, you know, I'm not ready to take this yet. He
said, I've got to learn to study and do a few things.
He never did go back to the Corps, which I thought
was great. It's not for everybody. No. But back in
those days, he didn't have much choice. But did he
have any stories about him being in the Corps, any
of the pranks that he played on other people or they
played on him?
No, I think the only thing that I guess really stuck
out in my mind is how everything had to be just
perfect. I mean, your shoes shined, and I mean, he
really stressed how everything had to be just so.
And if it wasn't, boy, you heard about it. and I
think he tried to impress that upon us and make us
part of the Corps in his own way. Was he pretty
strict then? Yeah, he was. He was strict, but
that's good too. Oh yes, there's nothing wrong
with that at all, Matt. Was he looking for
perfection like they were looking in the Corps in
his life as well as in all of you and your brothers
and sisters? No, not in the strictest sense. I
think he may be more so out of himself than his
family. Wouldn't you say? Yeah, I would say so.
What about his work ethic? Did that carry through
from generation to generation then?
No. Well, I think from his father's, he learned a
lot from his father. I know he was a lot like his
father was, and he was a real... conscientious
worker, and he thought things through. He didn't
make any hasty decisions on very many things at
all. And he brought along Nancy. He trained her in
some of the oil and gas matters here. But I guess he
didn't really require the children to learn about
the businesses that he had here. Nancy's really
the only one. Paul, which is his son, does work
here, but I think he took Nancy aside more and
trained her in the more important parts, which was
the irrigation company and now that it's sold, but
in the oil and gas and the water end of it.
But his dad, how did he train him to come into the
business? Oh, well, he had to start at the very
bottom. We always heard that. You always have to
start at the bottom and work your way up. He started
on the canal system with a shovel and with the
workers as far as putting in pipes and putting in
overflows and all. He actually started working on
the bottom line. and kind of worked his way up. His
dad didn't just give him an office. His dad made him
start from the bottom. So I remember several times
he'd say, well, you know, he worked at the bottom of
that shovel and dumped those culverts out of a
truck and rolled them down the hills and put them
in. So he started at the bottom. He learned the
irrigation company. He learned. Now, did he
expand the business beyond what his dad was doing,
or into other businesses from there?
Well, yeah, I think he definitely expanded.
Right. He went into, I know at the time, probably
they didn't, they expanded into the drying
facility, and they, we sell fertilizer and
chemicals down the road, they're about a mile, So
he went into all phases of rice farming as far as he
farmed rice. He supplied water to the rice farmers
and himself also. He sold fertilizer and
chemicals for rice crops and row crop. And also we
have a drying facility where we actually dry the
rice for the farmers. So they expanded in that
area. So they basically went right up through
vertical integration. Right. And then he really,
Even though they had always had oil and gas leases
on the land here, he and another gentleman formed a
small little exploration company and really got
involved with that. And so he expanded that too.
Okay, where did he go to get his engineering
expertise, or I shouldn't say engineering, but
the geology expertise, was that the other
individual? That was the other individual, he was
a geologist, and they just kind of had an arm's
length agreement and just started drilling
wells, shallow wells above 5,000 feet and to this
day we retain the top 5,000 feet. I see, okay. And we
lease the rest to the bigger guys. I noticed some
rigs coming down. Are they going down deep here
now? Yeah. I think at home they're fixing to go
around some place between 15 and 18,000. I'm not
sure exactly where they're going. It'll be
interesting to see what happens. Right.
What about your mother and her side of the family?
what is the history there was she from Garwood or no
now I don't know how pertinent this is do you want to
know about his he was married prior to my mother and
his first wife died during the polio epidemic oh
okay I wasn't aware of all of this I didn't know if
you wanted that information or I think it'd be good
if that's okay with you yeah that's fine with me and
she was Barbara Hudson from El Campo okay And,
uh... He had two children? Two children, Paul and
Gretchen, which are my half-brother and sister.
And then, um, then, oh, I, two or three years after
she passed away, he met my mother. At the time, my
mother, uh, was a, an airline stewardess for, uh, I
think it was CNS before it became Braniff
Airlines. and then and she was from west and west
virginia and they met and they married she moved to
garwood and didn't realize what she was moving to
from the mountains to the prairie and has been here
ever since yeah did she play uh we'll get into some
of their hobbies and where they were and things
that they did together but Did she get involved in
the water business at all, or it was just a
supportive type role? Very supportive. I would
expect you to need a lot of support. So she probably
heard all the stories and tales and everything
else that was taking place. Oh yes, right. Did he
have to spend a lot of time in legislative type
matters or going to Austin? as it relates to water
yes he did didn't he oh yes he was uh
we're trying to see here
he was on the board of directors of american rice
growers and blue ribbon rice mills And he was
actually president of American Rice
Incorporated, and that now is a facility that's in
Freeport that handles most of the rice in the area.
He was actually president of that. Then he was the
organizer and the first president of the U.S. Rice
Legislative Group and member of the National Rice
Advisory Committee. So he was real involved in the
rice arena in this part of the area. He's one of the
ones that helped with the farm bill and all. I'll
give you a copy of this. This is some of the things
that we... So now, he not only traveled just to
Washington, but he traveled internationally too
on behalf of the rice industry. Right, right.
Because there's one country over there, I can't
remember now, that people still... ask about him
is that right saudi arabia yeah and he's the only
person they ever ask about so he must have had very
good relationships with him he did he did and in
fact um whoever he was dealing with over there i
remember my he and my mother met them in greece
because they also had a home in greece and they
invited them over and al fadl and i can't remember
her name but very lovely couple And they did have a
grand rapport, which of course was important for
what they were trying to accomplish. Oh yeah, when
you go international it's personal
relationships that make the difference. Makes
all the difference.
With the water business, what were some of the
problems that he encountered over the years and
what did he do to solve them?
Well, I know from the beginning, at one point, we
were having trouble when LCRA built their dam, I
think, up in around Bay City area. The river flow
was below our suction pipes. So Bill went through
the process of building a low-water dam, and
there's a picture of it right there behind you. but
built that low water dam, that's a million dollar
dam, that there were no funds from the state at all.
He tried to get some funds to help build that dam,
and he couldn't get any funds from the state to help
build that dam. But he paid for it and built that dam
so that the suction pipes you'll see up there to the
left would be under the water again in order to pump
the water into our canal system. So that was a big
undertaking at that time to go through with the
proper procedures to get the state to okay it and
get the engineers and the proper people to build
that dam and it's still in existence today.
That's the picture of the river plant and right to
the left you can see the canal. Right, just where it
started.
That was a real large project that he had
undertaken in order to help the farmers in this
area survive. Yeah, and when did he do this? I have
to look at, it was probably in the early 80's,
probably 81. Yeah, okay. So in reality when it's
all said and done, this whole area down here, the
farmers probably owe him quite a debt of gratitude
for what he was doing, being able to get water to
them to allow them really to successfully farm, I
guess. That's right, because you cannot farm rice
without water, and these farmers could not afford
to actually go out and pay to dig a water well to
10-inch, 12-inch well to water their rice fields.
It's just... So that's why there
was really a rice industry in this area then
compared with down on the Gulf Coast. I think a lot
has to do with the water supply and a lot has to do
with the type of soil that you have here because
rice grows real good in this sandy soil also. But
your main water supply, they have a pumping plant.
There's one in Eagle Lake, there's one in Garwood,
and there's one in Bay City. And there's rice
growing off of each one of those systems.
What about cattle? Do you spend much time with
cattle? Mm-hmm. yeah he uh in fact in a way that was
almost his favorite thing it was the ranching part
of it especially when he was a lot younger and uh I
don't know uh we we still have cattle and it's still
a big part of our business I don't know what would
you add to that Ralph
Where did he pick up his expertise with cattle? Was
it through his dad? I guess maybe just through his
dad and maybe the farmers in the area. He's always
run. There's some pictures there of some of the
cattle that he's had. He had the land. And rice on a
rotation-type basis. Right. Okay. You can't farm
the whole 17,000 acres of it, and some it's not
farmable. But what wasn't, well, he'd always have
cattle to take in the area where the rice was
sitting, you know, the land dormant for two-,
three-year rotation. Well, and he also always had
good ranch managers. A couple of them I remember
really well. who were very knowledgeable in the
cattle business. And I think he just, you know,
learned from them all that he knew and it evolved
more or less. Did he change anything? Did he go to
crossbreeding or anything at it at any particular
times? Or has he pretty much stayed with the same
type of cattle over the years? I think in this area
he stayed pretty well at the same time. He didn't
get into any registered herds or anything like
that, mainly for breeding purposes or anything
like that. He just pretty well always,
you know, probably had anywhere from 500 to a
thousand head of cattle and maybe even more than
that. That's a sizable cow operation. If you look
at percentages of, I mean you fall in the top tier of
1-2% in terms of cattle numbers when you get up to
that. So it's a sizable operation from that
standpoint.
What is your fondest memory about your mother?
I'm putting you on the spot now a little bit. The
fondest memory about my mother?
Well, jeez, yes, you are putting me on the spot. I
would have to say Her
strength in, she's had rheumatoid arthritis
since she was 35. And she has never ever complained
that much about it. And just her strength in
dealing with that pain through the years as well as
being a supporting, loving wife and mother.
Because being married to a man like my father took a
lot of support just because of his travels, all
that he was involved in. Have they always lived out
there where she lives now, or did they live
someplace else at one time? They started out in El
Campo. And then they moved to Garwood to a little
house behind his parents' home while they built
the house that she presently lives in. That's a
lovely place, Donner. It is, isn't it? It's very,
very nice from there. Tell me a little bit about
yourself.
Where did you go for your education? Well, I was,
uh, I went to St. Mary's Hall in San Antonio for two
years, then I went to All Saints Municipal Girls
School in Vicksburg, Mississippi for four years,
and then I went to Wharton Junior College for two
years, or one year, one year, and then I went to
Baylor in Waco, Baylor University. And you were,
are, are a registered nurse, is that right? Yes.
Did you practice for her? Oh yeah, I practiced for
about 13 years. I see. In Houston area? No, in
Dallas in intensive care and post-anesthesia
recovery. You've seen a lot then. Yeah. But I have
to tell you one of the reasons that my father wanted
me to go to Baylor is his first wife went to Baylor.
And Aggies always dated Baylor girls. And that was
very important to him. That's interesting. What
about Mary? My sister? I
know that Mary, she went to All Saints Episcopal
Girls School. She, however, did not finish there.
She decided that she needed to come home and be in a
co-educational environment and graduated from
Rice High School. I think she has some secretarial
courses from Wharton Junior College and then she
worked for an attorney for quite some time in
Wharton. Does she still live in the area then? Yes,
she lives in Sugar Land not far from me. Oh, okay.
And she has two daughters. And do you have children
also? No, I don't. Were you all pretty close? Yeah,
we are. That's great. What about your
half-brother and half-sister? Okay, my sister
Gretchen, she went to St. Mary's Hall and then
transferred to All Saints and graduated from All
Saints. Then she went to the University of Texas
and was an art major. but never finished and I'm not
real sure what was more important than finishing.
I don't recall that. And she is married and has a
daughter, Sarah, and lives in Mill Valley,
California. Okay. And then he works here with
y'all? William Paul. He works here and he's
married and he has two children, Dudley and Lacey.
And one of those is at A&M then? Yes, Dudley is.
And Paul went to Sam Houston State? Yeah.
That's pretty good stage for all of you going to the
college in some way, shape, or form at one time.
Right, right. He also went to San Marcos Baptist
Academy, too.
Did your mother have much influence on your
education?
I think they decided jointly. Well, of course, my
father went away to school.